Feature/block3 Prepare repo (#16)
devonfw/hangar: documentation/azure-devops/setup-repository-script.asciidoc

:imagesdir: ./images/setup-repository-script
= Setting up a repository on Azure DevOps using script

By the end of this guide, a repository on Azure DevOps will be created in an automated way using a script.

== Prerequisites
* Have an Azure DevOps project already setup and Azure CLI installed and configured. If it is not the case, please go back to corresponding guide.

* Install https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[Git].

== Creating repository using provided script

The script located at `/scripts/repositories/azure-devops/create-repo.sh` allows you to either:

. Create an empty repository with just a README file and clone it to your computer into the directory you set. Useful when starting a project from scratch.

. Import an already existing directory or Git repository into your project giving a path or an URL. Useful for taking to Azure DevOps the development of an existing project.

=== Usage

```
  create_repo.bash \
      -a <action> \
      -d <local directory> \
      -o <organization> \
      -p <project> \

>       [-n <name of the repo>] \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      [-n <repository name>] \
```

      [-g <giturl>] \
      [-b <branch>] \
      [-r] \
      [-s] <branch strategy> \
      [-f] \
```

=== Flags

```
-a, --action                [Required] Use case to fulfil: create, import.
-d, --directory             [Required] Path to the directory where your repository will be cloned or initialized.

> -o, --org                   [Required] Name of the Azure DevOps organization (mandatory).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-o, --org                   [Required] Name of the Azure DevOps organization.

```

  -o, --org  Name of the Azure DevOps organization (mandatory).
  -p, --project      (Mandatory) Name of the Azure DevOps project.
  -g, --source-git-url       Source URL of the Git repository to import.
  -b, --source-branch       Source branch to be used as a basis to initialize the repository on import, as master branch.
  -r, --remove-other-branches       When combined with -b (and possibly -s), removes any other remaining branch.
  -s, --setup-branch-strategy     Creates branches and policies required for the desired workflow. Requires -b on import. Accepted values: gitflow.

>   -f, --force        Skips any user confirmation.

Reviewer: Fix indentation and style (required instead of mandatory, within brackets and as prefix)

Reviewer: Also, remove spaces at the beggining.

> = Setting up a repository on Azure DevOps using script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Setting up a repository on Azure DevOps
```

:imagesdir: ./images/setup-repository-script
= Setting up a repository on Azure DevOps using script

By the end of this guide, a repository on Azure DevOps will be created in an automated way using a script.

== Prerequisites
* Have an Azure DevOps project already setup and Azure CLI installed and configured. If it is not the case, please go back to corresponding guide.

* Install https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[Git].

== Creating repository using provided script

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  ./create-repo.sh -a 'import' -d <local source directory> -b <source branch> -s gitflow -r -o <organization> -p <project name> -n <repository name>

This will create `master` (and `develop` since a branching strategy is specified) from the `<source branch>`, removing any other branch (including `<source branch>`).

WARNING: This operation is destructive regarding branches on the local repository.

NOTE: Same command could also be used with a local directory, but then using `-b` and `-r` would be redundant.

== Branching strategies

To ensure the quality of development, it is crucial to keep a clean Git workflow. The following branching strategies are supported (using `-s` flag):

=== Gitflow

This is not an explanation of Gitflow (there are plenty of them on the web), but the actions performed by the script to help you start using this worflow.

==== Branches

* `master` is the initial (seed) branch.
* `develop` branch is created from `master` branch.

Any other branch part the strategy (feature, release, and hotfix branches) will be created by developers during the lifecycle of the project.

=== Policies

> You can define policies on your branches so you can secure them from commits not following certain rules. For example you can block squash merge.
> 
> Here are the policies we use as templates.
> 
> For the *develop* and *master* branch we have set those policies:
> 
> ```
> 
> Require a minimum number of reviewers: ON
>     Minimum number of reviewers: 1
>     Allow requestors to approve their own changes: ON
>     Prohibit the most recent pusher from approving their own changes: OFF
>     Allow completion even if some reviewers vote to wait or reject: OFF
>     When new changes are pushed: Reset all approval votes (does not reset votes to reject or wait)
> 
> Check for linked work items:            OFF
> 
> Check for comment resolution:           REQUIRED
> 
> Limit merge types:                      OFF
> 
> ```
> A config file exists to configure your own branch policies, see the file ./scripts/repositories/azure-devops/config/strategy.cfg +
> 
> NOTE: We set the number of reviewers to 1 and allowed requestors to approve their own changes because without it, it will block the creation of pipelines in next steps.
> 
> ==== Additional link
> 
> There are many other parameters you can use to define your branches policy, if you need to modify it, here is a link with more information about it. +
> https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/branch-policies?view=azure-devops&tabs=browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Azure DevOps it is possible to protect important branches against bad practices using branch policies.

The following branch policies are applied to `master` and `develop` branches:

* Require a minimum number of reviewers: ON
** Minimum number of reviewers: 1
** Allow requestors to approve their own changes: ON
** Prohibit the most recent pusher from approving their own changes: OFF
** Allow completion even if some reviewers vote to wait or reject: OFF
** When new changes are pushed: Reset all approval votes (does not reset votes to reject or wait)
* Check for linked work items: OFF
* Check for comment resolution: REQUIRED
* Limit merge types: OFF

The above policies are defined in a configuration file located at `/scripts/repositories/azure-devops/config/strategy.cfg`. Feel free to adapt it to your needs.

NOTE: This is the bare minimum standard for any project. We do not prohibit the most recent pusher from approving their own changes, although being more than recommendable, because if we do, it will block the auto-approval of Pull Requests generated during pipelines creation on the following guides.

You can find more information about branch policies in the https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/branch-policies?view=azure-devops[official documentation].
```

This Guide is made to be able to create repository with command line and automatically, if you prefer using the Azure web interface, you can follow this guide link:tutorial-azure-manual-repository-creation.asciidoc[].

== Prerequisites
For this part we suppose you have git and Azure CLI installed on your computer.

If not, check these pages:

Azure CLI : https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli +
Git : https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git

NOTE: Here you will see two types of repository, git repositories and Azure repositories, it is important to know that Azure repositories are still git repositories, but in this documentation we will use Azure repository to talk about the one we want to create, and git repository is about any other git repository (it can be host on github, on your local computer, on another Azure project ...)

== Using the script to create your repository

There is a script called create_repo.bash (located in the folder scripts/repositories/azure-devops of the repository).

In this part we will explain how to use the script to create your repository.

It can be used in three different ways:

>   - 1st case: Create an empty repository with just a README file and clone it to your computer into the directory you set (you can also use a sample application instead of an empty repository).
> 
>   - 2nd case: Import an existing git repository into your project, then clone this repo on your computer into the directory you set.
> 
>   - 3rd case: Convert a local folder into a git repository, then push this repository to your Azure project, works also if your folder is already a git repository, if it is just a local git repository it will add the remote origin url, if your git repository already has one configured, it will ask a confirmation to change it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create an empty repository with just a README file and clone it to your computer into the directory you set (you can also use a sample application instead of an empty repository).

2. Import an existing git repository into your project, then clone this repo on your computer into the directory you set.

3. Convert a local folder into a git repository, then push this repository to your Azure project, works also if your folder is already a git repository, if it is just a local git repository it will add the remote origin url, if your git repository already has one configured, it will ask a confirmation to change it.
```

Please use proper Asciidoc syntax, and use uppercase when writing product names. Also, Azure is not the same as Azure DevOps.

This will first import the repository stored in the given URL the same way as it would in subcase *a*, then as a reference branch is given, it will create (or replace if they already exist) *master* and *develop* from this *<reference branch>*, then as the `-s` flag is set it will create the branch policies detailed here <<Branches and policies>>. As the `-r` flag is set, all branches except *<reference branch>*, *master* and *develop* will be deleted.

===== Subcase c: +
  ./create_repo.bash -a 'import' -d <path to directory> -o https://dev.azure.com/<organization> -p <project name> -n <repository name>

If your folder *<path to directory>* is just a folder, it will convert it into a Git repository, push it to your Azure DevOps project and create *master* and *develop* branches. +
If your folder is a local Git repository, it will just push it to your Azure DevOps project. +
If your folder is an online Git repository, it will change the remote URL so that future commits will be pushed into your Azure DevOps repository but not on the one already configured, and it will push all your branches at the new URL. +

> 

Author: code behind changed, need to validate

===== Subcase d: +
  ./create_repo.bash -a 'import' -d <path to directory> -o https://dev.azure.com/<organization> -p <project name> -n <repository name> -b <reference branch> -r -s

If your folder *<path to directory>* is just a folder, it will act the exact same way as *2nd case c*. +
If your folder is a local Git repository, it will use *<reference branch>* to create *develop* and *master* (it will replace them if they already exists), delete all other branches that the 3 given before (`-r` is set), then it will just push it to your Azure DevOps project and create the policies defined below (`-s` is set). +
If your folder is an online Git repository, the branch *develop* and *master* will be created the same way as if it was a local git repository. Any other branch than *master*, *develop* and *<reference branch>* will be deleted (`-r`), then it will change the URL so that future commits will be pushed into your Azure DevOps repository but not on the one already configured, after that it will push all your branches at the new URL. Finally it will create the policies defined below (`-s`). +

> NOTE: `-r` and `-s` are independent, you can use one without the other it will not affect their use, but they are both dependent to `-b`.

Author: with "NOTE: Same command could also be used with a local directory, but then using `-b` and `-r` would be redundant." did you mean if we gave a giturl instead of lecal repo instead ?

> NOTE: `-r` and `-s` are independent, you can use one without the other it will not affect their use, but they are both dependent to `-b`.

Reviewer: No, I mean passing a local (not yet Git) directory instead of local Git repository, those flags wouldn't do anything.

== Branches and policies

To ensure the quality of development, you will need to have a clean Git workflow. For a new repository or when pushing a regular folder as your Azure DevOps repository, we created a Git workflow.

> === Branches
> 
> We created 3 branches:
> 
> ==== "develop"
> 
> This is the branch containing all finished development waiting for validation, every time you work on a new feature (or bug fix), you need to create a new branch, this branch must be created from *develop*, once your development is over, you can merge it into *develop* where validation tests will play on it. If these tests are successful, *develop* will be merged into *master*.
> 
> 
> ==== "master"
> 
> This branch contains every validated development ready to be released. It is from this branch we create release branches.
> 
> 
> ==== "feature/TEAM/featureName"
> 
> This branch is just for giving you an example of the template you can use for naming your feature branches.
> 
> NOTE: You should never commit directly on *develop* or *master*, modifications on *develop* should only come from merge of feature branches and modifications on *master* should only come from merge of *develop*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Gitflow

This is not an explanation of Gitflow (there are plenty of them on the web), but the actions performed by the script to help you start using this worflow.

==== Branches

* `master` is the initial (seed) branch. 
* `develop` branch is created from `master` branch.

Any other branch part the strategy (feature, release, and hotfix branches) will be created by developers during the lifecycle of the project.
```

We should not create the example feature branch, could be annoying for the user if a dozen a repos are created.

> === Policies
> 
> You can define policies on your branches so you can secure them from commits not following certain rules. For example you can block squash merge.
> 
> Here are the policies we use as templates.
> 
> For the *develop* and *master* branch we have limited the type of merge that can be done.
> 
> ==== master
> 
> image::master_policy.PNG[]
> 
> ==== develop
> 
> image::develop_policy.PNG[]
> 
> ==== Additional link
> 
> There are many other parameters you can use to define your branches policy, if you need to modify it, here is a link with more information about it. +
> https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/branch-policies?view=azure-devops&tabs=browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Policies

You can define policies on your branches so you can secure them from commits not following certain rules. For example you can block squash merge.

Here are the policies we use as templates.

For the *develop* and *master* branch we have limited the type of merge that can be done.

==== master

image::master_policy.PNG[]

==== develop

image::develop_policy.PNG[]

==== Additional link

There are many other parameters you can use to define your branches policy, if you need to modify it, here is a link with more information about it. +
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/branch-policies?view=azure-devops&tabs=browser

```
This is VERY opinionated, we should discuss which "consensual" policies to apply. It is a shame that Azure DevOps does not support restricting which branches can merge to others.

Author: I created policies as template but yes sure we should so a meeting about it to define them

Use the 1st case if this is a brand new repository. +
Use the 2nd case if you already started your code. +

=== Syntax +

```
  create_repo.bash
      [-a <String>]
      [-n <String>]
      [-d <String>]
      [-o <String>]
      [-p <String>]
      [-g <String>]
      [-b <string>]
      [-r]
      [-s]
      [-f]
```

=== Arguments +

```
  -a (for action) :       (Mandatory) The value of this will tell in which case the script must be executed, can be 'create' (1st case) or 'import'(2nd case).
  -n (for name) :         (Mandatory if the value of 'action' is 'create') Name the Azure DevOps repository will have.
                          If not set for action 'import', it will used the name of the Git repository you are trying to import or the name of the directory you will convert.
  -d (for directory) :    (Mandatory) Name of the directory where your repository will be cloned (for the action 'create' and 'import' if you used the -g flag), or name of the folder on your local machine you want to import (for the action 'import' if you did not use the -g flag).

>   -o (for organization) : URL of your Azure DevOps organization (mandatory)

Author: done, need test to validate

  -p (for project) :      (Mandatory) name of you Azure DevOps project
  -g (for giturl) :       URL of the Git repository you want to clone

>   -b (for branch) :       If you mention this parameter it will be used in the case you used the action 'import, it will import your repository as is but will create a master and develop branch from the branch you gave (if they already exists they will be replace, be careful), if you gave an URL it will import only the branch you gave and then create master and develop.

Author: develop created only when -s is provided, need test before resolve

>   -r (for remove) :       If you gave a branch as reference when importing an existing git repository, it will delete all other branches (except master and develop).

Author: done but still need test

>   -s (for strategy) :     Set this flag if you want the script to create branch policies with the template this script uses.

Author: done but need test

For the `-o`: Be careful, this parameter is not the name of your organization, but the URL of it.

When you use the second case, If the `-g` flag is set it will import the Git repository with the URL and clone your repository inside the path set with the `-d` flag, if the `-g` flag is not set it will import the directory set with the `-d` flag.

For the `-r` flag, it will be ignored if you choose the action create, or you when try to import a local directory (because there is no existing branches before the execution of the script). +
The flag will also be ignored if you did not mention a reference branch with the `-b` flag.

The `-s` flag is ignored if you re trying to import an existing git repository and you did not set a branch with the `-b` flag.

=== Usage

==== 1st case: Creating a new repo +

===== Subcase a +
  /path/to/script/create_repo.bash -a 'create' -d /path/to/directory -o https://dev.azure.com/azure_organization -p azure_project -n repository_azure

This command creates a repository on Azure DevOps and clones it into our local directory, the creates *develop* and *master* branch.

===== Subcase b +

>   /path/to/script/create_repo.bash -a 'create' -d /path/to/directory -o https://dev.azure.com/azure_organization -p azure_project -n repository_azure -s

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ./create_repo.bash -a 'create' -d <path to directory> -o https://dev.azure.com/<organization> -p <azure project> -n <repository name> -s

```

This command creates the repository and clones it the same way the Subcase *a* does it, then it creates the branch policies (see <<Branches and policies>> for more informations).

==== 2nd case: Importing a directory or a repository +
For the 2nd case, we will not give an exhaustive list of every combination of argument it is possible to use, but the list we give you will allow you to understand what you can do with them.

> ===== Subcase a +
>   /path/to/script/create_repo.bash -a 'import' -d /path/to/directory -o  https://dev.azure.com/azure_organization -p azure_project -n repository_import -g https://github.com/user/repository.git
> 
> It will import all the content of the repository stored at that url `\https://github.com/user/repository.git` under the name *repository_import*, if no name would have been set, the repository would have been imported under the name *repository* (it uses the url to know the name). +
> Then the repository is cloned inside the folder */path/to/directory*. +
> 
> NOTE: Importing a Git repository into Azure DevOps just imports the content (branchs, files ...), but once the repository is imported there is no link between them , any modification made on the original repo will not apply on your Azure DevOps project (and the other way around is also true). +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
===== Subcase a +
  ./create_repo.bash -a 'import' -d <path to directory> -o  https://dev.azure.com/<organization> -p <project name> -n <repository name> -g <git url>

This will import all the content of the repository stored at that URL `<git url>` under the name *<repository name>*, if no name is set, the repository will be imported under the name *repository* (it uses the URL to know the name). +
Then the repository is cloned inside the folder *<path to directory>*. +

NOTE: Importing a Git repository into Azure DevOps just imports the content (branchs, files ...), but once the repository is imported there is no link between them, any modification made on the original repo will not apply on your Azure DevOps project (and the other way around is also true). +

```

===== Subcase b +
  /path/to/script/create_repo.bash -a 'import' -d /path/to/directory -o  https://dev.azure.com/azure_organization -p azure_project -n repository_import -g https://github.com/user/repository.git -b reference -s -r

It will first import the repository stored at the url given the same way as it would in Subcase *a*, then as a reference branch is given, it will create (or replace if they already exist) *master* and *develop* from this *reference* branch, then as the `-s` flag is set it will create the branch policies detailed here <<Branches and policies>>. As the `-r` flag is set, all branches except *reference*, *master* and *develop* will be deleted.

> ===== Subcase c: +
>   /path/to/script/create_repo.bash -a 'import' -d /path/to/directory/repository_push -o https://dev.azure.com/azure_organization -p azure_project -n repository_push
> 
> If your folder */path/to/directory/repository_push* is just a folder, it will convert it into a Git repository, push it to your Azure DevOps project and create *master* and *develop*. +
> If your folder is a local Git repository, it will just push it to your Azure DevOps project. +
> If your folder is an online Git repository, it will change the url so that next commits will be pushed into your Azure DevOps repository but not on the one already configured, and it will push all your branches at the new URL. +
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
===== Subcase c: +
  ./create_repo.bash -a 'import' -d <path to directory> -o https://dev.azure.com/<organization> -p <project name> -n <repository name>

If your folder *<path to directory>* is just a folder, it will convert it into a Git repository, push it to your Azure DevOps project and create *master* and *develop* branches. +
If your folder is a local Git repository, it will just push it to your Azure DevOps project. +
If your folder is an online Git repository, it will change the remote URL so that future commits will be pushed into your Azure DevOps repository but not on the one already configured, and it will push all your branches at the new URL. +

```

If your folder */path/to/directory/repository_push* is just a folder, it will act the exact same way as *2nd case c*. +
If your folder is a local Git repository, it will use the branch *reference* to create *develop* and *master* (it will replace them if they already exists), delete all other branches that the 3 given before (`-r` is set), then it will just push it to your Azure DevOps project and create the policies defined below (`-s` is set). +
If your folder is an online Git repository, the branch *develop* and *master* will be created the same way as if it was a local git repository. Any other branch than *master*, *develop* and *reference* will be deleted (`-r`), then it will change the URL so that next commits will be pushed into your Azure DevOps repository but not on the one already configured, after that it will push all your branches at the new URL. Finally it will create the policies defined below(`-s`). +

NOTE: `-r` and `-s` and independent, you can use one without the other it will not affect their use, but they are both dependent to `-b`.

> 
> ==== Sample application
> 
> A repository containing a sample application exists, if you want to import it to your project, use the `2nd case a` with the URL: https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-reference .
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

=== Flags

```
-a, --action                [Required]  Use case to fulfil: create, import.
-d, --directory             [Required]  Path to the directory where your repository will be cloned or initialized.
-o, --org                   [Required]  Name of the Azure DevOps organization (mandatory).
-p, --project               [Required]  Name of the Azure DevOps project.
-n, --name                              Name for the Azure DevOps repository. By default, the source repository or directory name (either new or existing, depending on use case) is used.
-g, --source-git-url                    Source URL of the Git repository to import.
-b, --source-branch                     Source branch to be used as a basis to initialize the repository on import, as master branch.
-r, --remove-other-branches             When combined with -b (and possibly -s), removes any other remaining branch.
-s, --setup-branch-strategy             Creates branches and policies required for the desired workflow. Requires -b on import. Accepted values: gitflow.

> -f, --force                             Skips any user confirmation.

Reviewer: Fix double space between Required and flag description.
